Background: Cryoballoon (CB)-guided pulmonary vein isolation (PVI) is an established treatment for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (PAF), yet arrhythmia recurrence remains common. The contribution of individual pulmonary vein (PV) anatomy and ostial size to long-term outcomes after single-shot CB-guided PVI is poorly defined. We aimed to determine whether anatomical PV characteristics predict long-term freedom from AF recurrence.

Methods: We conducted a single-center observational cohort study of 353 consecutive patients (mean age 58 +/- 11 years; 56% male) undergoing CB-guided PVI for PAF between 2012 and 2018. Preprocedural cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was used to characterize individual PV anatomy and to compute the cross-sectional area (CSA) of each PV. Outcomes were compared across anatomical subgroups, including normal versus variant anatomy, the presence versus absence of a left common PV (LCPV) and right variant PVs, and enlarged versus normal PV CSA.

Results: Acute PVI was achieved in 100% of patients. Normal PV anatomy (two left and two right PVs) was present in 223 patients (63%) and variant anatomy in 130 patients (37%). Over an observation period of 48 months, AF recurrence was documented in 167 patients (47%). Patients with recurrence had significantly enlarged right-sided PVs and left superior PVs (LSPVs) compared with those who remained arrhythmia-free (p < 0.001). An LCPV, present in 75 patients, was associated with significantly impaired long-term AF-free survival relative to normal anatomy (log-rank p < 0.001). Right variant PVs, present in 35 patients, were likewise associated with significantly impaired long-term AF-free survival (log-rank p < 0.001).

Conclusions: Variant PV anatomy is a strong predictor of AF recurrence after CB-guided PVI for PAF. Enlarged cross-sectional areas of the right-sided PVs and the LSPVs correlate with recurrence. Preprocedural assessment of individual PV anatomy may help identify patients at higher risk of long-term failure following single-shot CB-guided PVI.
