Background: Catheter ablation is curative for paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (SVT), but diagnosing atrial tachycardia (AT) during electrophysiology study can be challenging, particularly when the tachycardia terminates in response to pacing. A reliable maneuver to distinguish AT from other SVT mechanisms is needed.

Objectives: This study sought to develop and validate a novel pacing maneuver to diagnose AT during ongoing tachycardia.

Methods: In a prospective electrophysiology study, 147 SVTs were evaluated, comprising 28 ATs, 87 atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardias (AVNRT), and 32 orthodromic reciprocating tachycardias (ORT); AVNRT and ORT were combined as the non-AT group (n = 119). A single atrial extrastimulus was delivered from the proximal coronary sinus during tachycardia, with the coupling interval beginning 20 ms shorter than the tachycardia cycle length and progressively shortened until the His bundle (HB) was first reset, then further until the SVT terminated. We assessed the response of the tachycardia at first HB resetting and the pattern of tachycardia termination.

Results: At first HB resetting, the tachycardia was unaffected in 27 of 28 ATs, whereas in all non-AT cases the tachycardia was simultaneously reset at HB resetting or terminated with atrio-Hisian (A-H) block. Among SVTs that persisted and were further shortened, all 33 that terminated with A-H block were non-AT, whereas termination with Hisian-atrial (H-A) block occurred in 5 ATs and 7 non-ATs. For AT diagnosis, the pattern of the tachycardia remaining unaffected at HB resetting yielded a sensitivity of 96%, specificity of 100%, positive predictive value of 100%, and negative predictive value of 99%. For non-AT diagnosis, termination with A-H block yielded a sensitivity of 92%, specificity of 100%, positive predictive value of 100%, and negative predictive value of 42%.

Conclusions: A single atrial extrastimulus delivered from the proximal coronary sinus during tachycardia is a useful and effective maneuver for diagnosing AT. AT is characterized by the tachycardia remaining unaffected during His bundle resetting.
